deprecate Bazel builder in @angular/bazel (#37190)
angular/angular: packages/bazel/src/schematics/README.md

# Schematics for Bazel

> Bazel builder for Angular CLI has been deprecated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Bazel builder for Angular CLI has been deprecated.

**tl;dr: We have deprecated the the Bazel builder and schematics for Angular CLI. As of Angular v10 we removed the ability to call `ng add @angular/bazel` to convert existing Angular CLI projects to use Bazel. We believe that some Angular projects can greatly benefit from using Bazel - these projects should use Bazel Web directly as documented in the [canonical example in the Bazel Web repo](https://github.com/bazelbuild/rules_nodejs/tree/master/examples/angular).**
```

> The schematics for Bazel builder have been in Angular Labs for some time,
> but over the course of its evaluation the Angular team has found that they did
> not meet our expectation of providing a smooth experience to get users onboard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The schematics for Bazel builder have been in Angular Labs for some time. Via labs we have been able to experiment with wrapping Bazel into the CLI and make it's use in the CLI invisible to developers using Angular CLI.

Through this experiment we, the Angular team have found that wrapping Bazel into Angular CLI does currently not meet our expectation of providing a great experience to developers using Angular.

```

There are multiple factors:

> 1. Bazel ecosystem for Javascript is still evolving at a rapid pace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Bazel ecosystem for the Web is still evolving at a rapid pace.
```

> 2. The introduction of Ivy compiler enables new ways to use Bazel in a faster

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. The introduction of the Angular Ivy compiler enables new ways to use Bazel in a faster
```

   and more efficient manner.

> 3. Feature parity with Angular CLI is difficult to achieve.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Feature parity with Webpack based Angular CLI is currently difficult to achieve without trade offs that would not be acceptable for many Angular users.
```

# Schematics for Bazel

Bazel builder for Angular CLI has been deprecated.

> **tl;dr: We have deprecated the the Bazel builder and schematics for Angular CLI. As of Angular v10 we removed the ability to call `ng add @angular/bazel` to convert existing Angular CLI projects to use Bazel. We believe that some Angular projects can greatly benefit from using Bazel - these projects should use Bazel Web directly as documented in the [canonical example in the Bazel Web repo](https://github.com/bazelbuild/rules_nodejs/tree/master/examples/angular).**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We believe that a lot of projects would benefit from directly using Bazel, the same way we do in Angular. Validating the experimental Bazel schematics for the Angular CLI for the past year as part of Angular Labs, we concluded that they don't implement the most optimal approach. In v10 we're deprecating `@angular/bazel` and encouraging developers to explore using Bazel directly following the [canonical example](https://github.com/bazelbuild/rules_nodejs/tree/master/examples/angular).
```

> The schematics for Bazel builder have been in Angular Labs for some time. Via labs we have been able to experiment with wrapping Bazel into the CLI and make it's use in the CLI invisible to developers using Angular CLI.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using the Bazel builder we abstracted the build file management and tooling orchestration, making Bazel invisible for developers.
```

> Through this experiment we, the Angular team have found that wrapping Bazel into Angular CLI does currently not meet our expectation of providing a great experience to developers using Angular.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Through this experiment we found that wrapping Bazel into Angular CLI does currently not meet our expectation of providing a great experience to developers.
```

> There are multiple factors:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are a few reasons we're taking this path:
```

> 1. Bazel ecosystem for the Web is still evolving at a rapid pace.

Reviewer 2: I'd also add that hiding the build graph defeats the purpose of using Bazel.

2. The introduction of the Angular Ivy compiler enables new ways to use Bazel in a faster
   and more efficient manner.

> 3. Feature parity with Webpack based Angular CLI is currently difficult to achieve without trade offs that would not be acceptable for many Angular users.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Feature parity with Webpack based Angular CLI is currently difficult to achieve without trade-offs that would not be acceptable for many Angular users.
```

Reviewer 3: Maybe mention that it's still possible to use Webpack and Angular CLI with Bazel. Though you'd don't have all the benefits of using Bazel. It's more of an easier version of the setup.

Example using Angular CLI + Bazel with Architect
https://github.com/bazelbuild/rules_nodejs/tree/master/examples/angular_bazel_architect

For users who are currently using Bazel builder, there are a few migration
options.

> ## View Engine

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> If your application is using View Engine, you could leave the Bazel files

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> in your workspace, and manage them manually.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> ng build --leaveBazelFilesOnDisk

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> ## Ivy

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Migrate from `@angular/bazel`
```

> If your application is using Ivy, you should also leave the Bazel files on disk.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You could leave the Bazel files in your workspace, and manage them manually:
```

```
ng build --leaveBazelFilesOnDisk
```

> Once that is done, switch to using the latest [`ng_ts_library`](https://github.com/bazelbuild/rules_nodejs/blob/master/examples/angular/tools/angular_ts_library.bzl) rule.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you're using Ivy, in your build files replace `ng_module` with the [`ng_ts_library`](https://github.com/bazelbuild/rules_nodejs/blob/master/examples/angular/tools/angular_ts_library.bzl) rule. This new rule leverages ngtsc plugin supported by `ts_library`, and it is much faster.
```

> This new rule leverages ngtsc plugin supported by `ts_library`, and it is much

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> faster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

# Schematics for Bazel

Bazel builder for Angular CLI has been deprecated in version 10.

We believe that a lot of projects would benefit from using Bazel, the same way

> we do in Angular repository. We still believe that is true in many cases.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
we do in the Angular repository. We still believe that is true in many cases.
```
